# Our Introduction and  Proposal  

The interest of this proposal is the study of US soldiers and civilians that were prisoners of war (POWs) within German and Japanese territory during World War 2. With World War 2 being an constant subject for movies, television, and various other mediums, its prevalence in academic scholarship is no surprise. By narrowing World War 2 down to the more specific genre of American, we mean to intensively study particular scenarios within the war.  Though this study generates many questions, our goal is to examine what is already thought of as concrete (ex. Japan’s brutality to prisoners). By studying the scholarship surrounding American POWs, along with making independent observations of related data, we aim to both find and utilize new methods of study that can add to the already popular subject of World War 2 scholarship.

This study was made possible through The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration’s database (NARA), an online database that houses a variety of historical data. Within the NARA’s database is a dataset of 143,374 individuals who were American POWs. The dataset was created through monthly reports in the form of punch cards from the International Committee of the Red Cross to the U.S. Army between 1941-1946. Gaining these reports from the U.S. Army in 1959, the NARA, in conjunction with the Veterans Administration, transformed the punch cards into an electronic format, prompting the NARA to put the data online in 2002 (“Records of World War II Prisoners of War: Series Description” 1). With this data being online and unrestricted to the public, it allowed us to begin our independent academic study, examining the available data through digital methods.
