# The Problem with Scholarship in this Area


The popularity of World War 2 stories within mainstream culture has impacted World War 2 academic writing in negative ways, limiting the variety of academic works that study American POWs that were held in German and Japanese POW camps. Echoing the subject matter of mainstream works, academics have focused on the personal/individual experiences of POWS in those camps, fixating mostly on Holocaust victims or the “exciting tale” of an escapee. Though these personal and emotional experiences are important, the amount that these experiences are being covered by academics compared to an overall study limits the academic scope of the POW subject. As we are not the first to notice this phenomenon, other scholars have begun to address this limitation, covering American POW research from an analytic/diagnostic point of view. This analytic response to the subject of American POW experiences during World War 2 has created two general themes of scholarship:

  1. Analyzing the culture of a captor’s country and its affect on POWs
  2. Red Cross data analysis

## Analyzing the Captor’s Culture

The scholarship surrounding the analysis of the captor in World War 2 pales in comparison to the number of works focusing on the personal experiences of the prisoners. Trying as much as possible to eliminate the bias that seems to accompany the emotional trauma of American POW experiences, academics like Dr. Simon MacKenzie, Dr. Robert La Forte, Dr. Mark Spoerer, and Dr. Jochen Fleischhacker examine how the culture of the captors both caused and reflected their notorious actions in various POW stories.

In Dr. Simon MacKenzie’s article The Treatment of Prisoners of War in World War II, Dr. MacKenzie examines why Germany and Japan treated their POWs the way they did. In his study, he questions why there was such a difference in treatment between Germany and Japan, Japan being known for their brutal practices. Though known for their exemplary treatment of POWs leading up to World War 2 because of their Bushido tradition, the Japanese’s Bushido transition soured by the time World War 2 came around. Citing the interwar years as a breeding ground for xenophobic nationalism, the Bushido transition made surrendering into a source of shame and contempt. This new evolution of Bushido affected the culture’s idea of surrendering, with Japanese soldiers choosing death instead of capture and American POWs being treated poorly because they surrendered (MacKenzie 512–513). With the Germans idea about surrendering being different, Dr. MacKenzie cites the German’s treatment of American POWs as a way to assure that German POWs would be treated well. Seen in a “hand tying incident” and the US’ threat of war crime punishment toward the end of the war, the Germans were compelled to treat American POWs well because of a “mutual hostage factor” (MacKenzie 491–494). With the Japanese’s Bushido tradition fueling contempt for those surrendering and the German’s idea of a “mutual hostage factor” when it came to American POW’s, Dr. Sean MacKenzie’s study allows an academic look at why Axis powers had differing POW treatment policies, citing tradition evolution and surrender culture as causes.

Expanding upon the Japanese’s contempt for POWs, Dr. Robert La Forte examines in Resistance in Japanese Prison Camps during World War II the conditions of Japanese POW camps and how American resistance was treated within. With MacKenzie’s article outlining the reasons for Japanese brutality against POWs, Dr. La Forte studies how American POWs responded. Though the conditions were terrible in the camps (starvation, beatings, executions), responses by the Japanese captors were meant to deter resistance (La Forte 109). An example of this was policy of executing 9 prisoners if one escaped, prompting American officers to stand guard, making sure no one prisoner would endanger the others (La Forte 113). A variety of Japanese POW policies were meant to break down American POWs mentally, targeting innocent POWs to punish those who resisted and/or escaped. Though focused on American POW experiences like the bloated experienced-based academic works, Dr. Robert La Forte adds to POW scholarship by studying how the policies of Japanese POW camps affected the resistance of American POWs, examining the experiences, but not retelling them.

With Dr. La Forte going into depth about the Japanese POW camps, Dr. Mark Spoerer and Dr. Jochen Fleischhacker specifically examine the POW camps in Germany in their article Forced Laborers in Nazi Germany: Categories, Numbers, and Survivors, focusing on forced labor in German camps. Though approximately 26% of the German labor force (of approximately 31 million) between 1944-1945 was foreigners, US POWs made up a small portion of that, frequently lumped into various “Other” categories (Spoerer and Fleischhacker 172). Although this article doesn’t focus on American POWs like the rest of the relevant scholarship and more on Germany’s feeling toward various European races, Dr. Spoerer and Dr. Fleishhacker uniquely fixate on the race of the prisoners and how their race affected how they were treated. By focusing on race within German POW camps, Dr. Spoerer and Dr. Fleischhacker fill a gap in POW academic scholarship, or at the very least, propose a new way in which to study it.

## Red Cross Data Analysis

Paralleling the source of our data, some scholars have began to study both the Red Cross’ evaluations of German and Japanese POW camps and the data that the Red Cross created with these evaluations. By trying to steer away from personal experiences and not being able to depend on Germany or Japan to have a reliable record of how American POWs were treated, the Red Cross’ records become the most reliable data available, being an independent agency. Scholars like Dr. Vasilis Vourkoutiotis use Red Cross databases to evaluate the status and conditions of various German camps, while others like Dr. James Morrow examine the problems the Red Cross data may have, pointing to various scenarios that hinder a complete evaluation.

The most relevant scholarship compared to our data are the works Prisoners of War and the German High Command and What the Angels Saw: Red Cross and Protecting Power Visits to Anglo-American POWs, 1939-45, two works by Dr. Vasilis Vourkoutiotis that study the conditions of German POW camps through the data brought back by members of the Red Cross. The scholarship is so relevant to our data that Dr. Vourkoutiotis even used the same record group from the National Archives as we did, Record Group 389. Choosing the status/conditions of POW camps that was only available physically in D.C., he was able to study a different dataset within the record group than the online dataset that we used. Compiling the Red Cross’ data, Dr. Vourkoutiotis studies each camp’s status through various reports, these statuses being “Excellent”, ”Good”, “Fairly Satisfactory”, “Seriously deficient”, and “Wholly inadequate” (Vourkoutiotis, “What the Angels Saw: Red Cross and Protecting Power Visits to Anglo-American POWs, 1939-45” 693). The conditions that were taken into consideration in each status report stemmed from basic needs, “food”, “shelter”, “health standards”, “clothing”, “overcrowding”, etc. (Vourkoutiotis, “What the Angels Saw: Red Cross and Protecting Power Visits to Anglo-American POWs, 1939-45” 691). Going deeper into the data, Dr. Vourkoutiotis studied the Red Cross’ mistreatment reports from 1940-1945, with the total reports being separated by each of the four seasons. The mistreatment reports were separated into three violations: “None/minor problems”, “Harassments”, “Serious violations” (Vourkoutiotis, Prisoners of War and the German High Command 178). The examination of German camp condition reports and mistreatment reports by Dr. Vourkoutiotis adds important research to American POW scholarship, focusing on data instead of personal experiences, with that data coming from an independent party like the Red Cross.

Though the Red Cross’ data as an independent party is more academically reliable than foreign records or personal POW experiences, the data is not without its faults or its inability to address certain situations. Though Dr. Vourkoutiotis mentions German policies like the “Commando Order”, Dr. James Morrow evaluates both Germany and Japan, aiming in The Institutional Features of the Prisoners of War Treaties to cover some of the scenarios in which the Red Cross cannot account for (Vourkoutiotis, “What the Angels Saw: Red Cross and Protecting Power Visits to Anglo-American POWs, 1939-45” 706). First evaluating Japan, Dr. Morrow raises the fact that the Japanese did not allow the Red Cross access to POWs during the first few months of the Pacific War (Morrow 975). With this section missing from Red Cross data, it becomes apparent that there is an amount of unlisted POWs within the Red Cross’ reports. Another scenario brought up is when a US submarine sinks a Japanese transport ship that is transporting US POWs. Though the Japanese might not have been in the wrong in this situation, an independent organization like the Red Cross would list the deaths of the US POWs as being under Japanese control (Morrow 976). Evaluating Germany also, Dr. Morrow states that the most dangerous time for a POW in Germany was from the time of surrendering until entering the actual POW camp. With different scenarios of revenge and not wanting to deal with prisoners, US soldiers being killed by German soldiers before arriving at a POW camp would not show up in Red Cross reports. If the killing of US soldiers before officially becoming “POWs” could be added to the evaluation of German camps by the Red Cross, the amount of deaths would taint an the overall positive review. (Morrow 976–977). By evaluating and questioning the Red Cross reports of American POWs, Dr. Morrow adds to the academic study of both American POWs and Red Cross data, a questioning voice creating a well-rounded scholarship.

## Digital Methods Used in Scholarship

With technology being incorporated into most occupations, the same can be said with general academia. However, within the specific scholarship of American POW analysis, the use of digital methods does not seem to be universally used. Analyzing mass data, Dr. MacKenzie settles with just including a few percentages of the data within the text, not using even a standard graph to make the numbers more reader-friendly (MacKenzie 515). Seeing a subtle transition from just in-text percentages, Dr. Morrow accompanies his percentages with a basic table of “Death rates of POWs in captivity”. Having 7 different terms, each having a different percentage accompanying it, Dr. Morrow uses the simple digital method of a visual table to help the reader understand the data by not cluttering it within the text (Morrow 984). Though it might not be extreme, the transition from Dr. MacKenzie’s 1994 work having no visuals to Dr. Morrow’s 2001 work having one is important, introducing digital methods within the analytic study of American POWs.

The use of more frequent and “advanced” digital methods can be seen in the works of Dr. Vasilis Vourkoutiotis, Dr. Mark Spoerer, and Dr. Jochen Fleischhacker.  Not only is the scholarship of Dr. Vourkoutiotis the most relevant to our project as mentioned previously, but also in his use of digital methods. Using mass data similar to our own, he utilizes various forms of bar graphs to visualize what would normally be a complicated set of numbers. From actual numbers to percentages, Dr. Vourkoutiotis’ employed visuals solely to exhibit mass data (Vourkoutiotis, Prisoners of War and the German High Command 166–183). Although not as relevant within the specific American POW scholarship as the other works, Dr. Mark Spoerer, and Dr. Jochen Fleischhacker’s Forced Laborers in Nazi Germany: Categories, Numbers, and Survivors utilize “advanced” digital methods through multiple table graphs. However standard table graphs seem to be, this work uses them both as visual props and as an avenue to visualize their mass data (Spoerer and Fleischhacker 175–202). Though “advanced” digital methods within the scholarship are limited to solely bar graphs or mostly table graphs, the amount the graphs are being used is substantial. Comparing Forced Laborers in Nazi Germany: Categories, Numbers, and Survivors’ eleven tables to The Institutional Features of the Prisoners of War Treaties’ one table demonstrates the evolution of digital methods within American POW scholarship.
